# fstringen
fstringen (pronounced: f-string-gen) is a library for writing text and code
generators in Python. It builds upon [f-strings](
https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html#f-strings) available
in Python 3.6+, and it is based on two core concepts: models and generators.

fstringen was designed to generate code based on OpenAPI specs, but that's
just one possible use case. It can take any dictionary-equivalent model
(including YAML and JSON) and turn that into a browsable model, with
rudimentary support for cross-references. Generators then transform this model
in the desired output.

A `Selectable` is simply a Python dictionary (which may be sourced from a YAML
or JSON file) representing a hierarchy, typically with deep nesting. The
`select` operation is run on `Selectable`s to select a new `Selectable` based
on a path selection mechanism. `Model` is just an alias for `Selectable`, and
it's usually used when referring to a `Selectable` loaded from a file

Generators are functions annotated with the `@gen()` decorator, which gives
some extra powers to special f-strings expressions in them (automagic
indentation, smart list insertion and scope-related hacks). Generators may also
be configured to automatically output to files, with optional header notices.

## Installing
You can install directly from PyPI:

    $ pip3 install fstringen --user

## Using
fstringen is based on special f-strings, called fstringstars. They are
basically triple-quoted f-strings that start and ends with an asterisk (`*`).
This special syntax indicates to fstringen that the string should be adapted
with extra features like automagic indentation, smart list insertion and
scope-escaping tricks.

A generator that outputs to a file looks like this (this is the `example.py`
file in this project):

```py
from fstringen import gen, Model

model = Model.fromDict({
    "structs": {
        "mystruct": {
            "color": "string"
        },
        "anotherstruct": {
            "name": "string",
            "age": "int"
        }
    }
})


@gen()
def gen_struct(struct):
    fields = ["{} {}".format(field.name, field)
              for field in struct.select("*")]

    return f"""*
    type {struct.name} struct {{
        {fields}
    }}

    *"""


@gen(model=model, fname="myfile.go", comment="//")
def gen_myfile(model):
    return f"""*
    package main

    // Let's generate some structs!
    {[gen_struct(struct) for struct in model.select("/structs/*")]}
    *"""
```

All generator functions using fstringstars must be decorated with `@gen()`.
When no parameters are given, the generator is considerate a subordinate
generator (i.e., they need to be called explicitly from other generators).
When the `model` and `fname` arguments are used, the generator becomes a file
generator, which is automatically executed and output to that file when the
script exists (i.e., you don't need to explicitly call file generators).

Inside generators, fstringstars can use regular f-string `{expression}`
invocations.

The real power of fstringen comes with `Selectable`s and `Model`s, which allow
easy selection of data (`Model` is just an alias for `Selectable`, and `Model`
is usually used when referring to a `Selectable` loaded from a file):

- Every `Selectable` has the `select` method, which takes a `path` and returns
  a new `Selectable` based on the query that path indicates.
- Every `Selectable` has a `name` attribute, corresponding to the dictionary
  key or array index for that element.
- If a path ends with `/*` and the preceding path contains a dictionary,
  a `Selectable` list of `Selectable`s is returned, containing all items in
  that dictionary.
- If a path element ends with `->`, the value contained in that attribute is
  assumed to contain a path (absolute or relative), and that path is used to
  look up the referenced object in the same `Model`.
- Three convenience methods are also available in `Selectable`s. All of them
  can take a path to query under that `Selectable`, of if called without a
  path, they apply to the `Selectable` in question:
  - `is_reference` checks whether a given `Selectable` contains a reference.
  - `has` allows for verification of the existence of a path under that
    `Selectable`.
  - `is_enabled` method verifies that the path exists and has a truthy value.

The two main imports from `fstringen` are `gen` and `Model`. An additional
import is available, `Mapper`, but it's entirely optional. It wraps a
dictionary for looking up things like type mappings, and it returns alarming
strings when no match is found.

## Caveats
fstringen does dangerous things with scope and function re-declaration. This
means you should only use it in scripts that are code generators, and code
generators alone (i.e., they don't do anything else). We sacrificed correctness
for neatness and ease-to-use.

Python 3.6+ is required. PyYAML is an optional dependency.

## Known issues
Because of Python limitations, a few things are not possible:

**Quotes in fstringstars strings**

Just as you can't have a triple-quoted string like this in Python:

    my_str = """"a""""

You can't have a fstringstar like this:

    my_fstringsar = f"""*"a"*"""

That's because Python can't figure out how that string starts or ends
(fstringstars are compiled to triple-quoted Python f-strings). You achieve the
same result in two different ways. Using line breaks:

    my_fstringsar = f"""*
    "a"
    *"""

Or with escapes in a single-line:

    my_fstringsar = f"""*\\\"a\\\"*"""


** Don't compare with `is` **

When dealing with a `Selectable` or a `Model`, don't use the `is` comparison
operator. Consider the following code:

    mybool = model.select("/path/to/a/bool")

When checking whether `mybool` is `True` or `False`, do it using `==` or if in
a conditional, just check it directly without a comparison. The same applies
to `None`.

The reason for this limitation is that Python does not allow us to subclass
`None`, `True` and `False`, which are global objects that can't be changed.
Since `select` always returns a `Selectable`, that `Selectable` can never be
such a global object, and therefore `is` comparisons will always fail.
